"Success is not final, failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts." - Winston Churchill
"Study while others are sleeping; work while others are loafing; prepare while others are playing; and dream while others are wishing." - William Arthur Ward
"Don't watch the clock; do what it does. Keep going." - Sam Levenson
"Success is the sum of small efforts, repeated day in and day out." - Robert Collier
"The only place where success comes before work is in the dictionary." - Vidal Sassoon
"The difference between ordinary and extraordinary is that little extra." - Jimmy Johnson
"The successful warrior is the average man, with laser-like focus." - Bruce Lee
"The more that you read, the more things you will know. The more that you learn, the more places you'll go." - Dr. Seuss
"I have not failed. I've just found 10,000 ways that won't work." - Thomas Edison
"Believe you can and you're halfway there." - Theodore Roosevelt
"Success is not the key to happiness. Happiness is the key to success. If you love what you are doing, you will be successful." - Albert Schweitzer
"I never dreamt of success. I worked for it." - Estee Lauder
"Success is not something you pursue. Success is something you attract by the person you become." - Jim Rohn
"Study without desire spoils the memory, and it retains nothing that it takes in." - Leonardo da Vinci
"The only limit to our realisation of tomorrow will be our doubts of today." - Franklin D. Roosevelt
"You can't build a reputation on what you are going to do." - Henry Ford
"I am not a failure because I haven't succeeded yet." - David Bowie
"Success is not measured by what you accomplish, but by the opposition you have encountered, and the courage with which you have maintained the struggle against overwhelming odds." - Orison Swett Marden
"Your work is going to fill a large part of your life, and the only way to be truly satisfied is to do what you believe is great work. And the only way to do great work is to love what you do." - Steve Jobs
"There are no secrets to success. It is the result of preparation, hard work, and learning from failure." - Colin Powell
"Strive for progress, not perfection." - Unknown
"Believe in yourself and all that you are. Know that there is something inside you that is greater than any obstacle." - Christian D. Larson
"You don't have to be great to start, but you have to start to be great." - Zig Ziglar
"The successful man is the one who finds out what is the matter with his business before his competitors do." - Roy L. Smith
"Education is the passport to the future, for tomorrow belongs to those who prepare for it today." - Malcolm X
"Success is not always about greatness. It's about consistency. Consistent hard work leads to success. Greatness will come." - Dwayne Johnson
"Do the hard jobs first. The easy jobs will take care of themselves." - Dale Carnegie
"Success is not a destination, it's a journey." - Zig Zig
"Success is not something that happens to you. It's something that happens because of you and the actions you take." - Unknown
"The more you know, the more you realise you don't know." - Aristotle
"If you want to achieve greatness, stop asking for permission." - Unknown
"Success is not final, failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts." - Winston Churchill
"Don't let yesterday take up too much of today." - Will Rogers
"The biggest challenge in life is being yourself… in a world trying to make you like everyone else." - Unknown
"Success is the sum of small efforts, repeated day-in and day-out." - Robert Collier
"The best way to predict the future is to create it." - Abraham Lincoln
"Success is not the key to happiness. Happiness is the key to success. If you love what you are doing, you will be successful." - Albert Schweitzer
"The only way to do great work is to love what you do." - Steve Jobs
"The only limit to our realisation of tomorrow will be our doubts of today." - Franklin D. Roosevelt
"Success is not a destination, it's a journey." - Zig Ziglar
"The more that you read, the more things you will know. The more that you learn, the more places you'll go." - Dr. Seuss
"The only thing standing between you and your goal is the story you keep telling yourself." - Unknown
"The expert in anything was once a beginner." - Helen Hayes
"If you don't know where you're going, any road will take you there." - Lewis Carroll
"Education is not the filling of a pail, but the lighting of a fire." - William Butler Yeats
"The only way to do great work is to love what you do." - Steve Jobs
"The secret of success is to do the common thing uncommonly well." - John D. Rockefeller Jr.
"If you want to achieve greatness, stop asking for permission." - Unknown
"Success is a journey, not a destination. The doing is often more important than the outcome." - Arthur Ashe
"You don't have to be great to start, but you have to start to be great." - Zig Ziglar
"Success is not a destination, it's a journey." - Zig Ziglar
"Believe in yourself and all that you are. Know that there is something inside you that is greater than any obstacle." - Christian D. Larson
"Success is not the absence of failure; it's the persistence through failure." - Aisha Tyler
"Don't be afraid to give up the good to go for the great." - John D. Rockefeller
"The difference between who you are and who you want to be is what you do." - Unknown
"Success is not how high you have climbed, but how you make a positive difference to the world." - Roy T. Bennett
"The way to get started is to quit talking and begin doing." - Walt Disney
"There are no shortcuts to any place worth going." - Beverly Sills
"Success is not final, failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts." - Winston Churchill
"The only person you are destined to become is the person you decide to be" - Ralph Waldo Emerson