Q1. 
Question: 
Which one of the following is contraindicated in a patient under 12? 

A. Clarithromycin
B. Co-amoxiclav
C. Azithromycin
D. Ciprofloxacin
E. Answer Doxycycline

Explanation: Doxycycline is a tetracycline antibiotic that can cause permanent discoloration of teeth and affects bone growth in children under 8 years old. Therefore, it is generally not recommended for use in patients under the age of 12


Q2. 
Question: 
Ms. B comes into the pharmacy asking to speak to the pharmacist. She tells you her stools have been hard and pellet like. You can see that she may be pregnant and on questioning, you confirm that she is 7 months pregnant. She has tried to change her diet and drink more water but this has been ineffective. She has no other medical condition and on no other medication.

Which of the following is the most appropriate advice to give Ms. B? 

A. Recommend the use of Senna tablets
B. Recommend the use of Pepto-Bismol
C. Recommend the use of Bisacodyl tablets
D. Recommend the use of milk of magnesia
E. Answer Recommend the use of Lactulose 

Explanation: 
Ms B is suffering from constipation so she needs a laxative if dietary measures have been ineffective.
Pepto-Bismol & Milk of Magnesia -for indigestion
Senna & Bisacodyl - stimulant laxatives and should not be used first-line in pregnancy

Q3. 
Question:
A 66-year-old man has been prescribed loperamide 2mg capsules for acute diarrhoea. The prescription states 'to be taken as directed' but the patient cannot recall how he was told to take them.

What is the maximum number of loperamide capsules this patient could take in ONE day?
 
A. 6
B. Answer 8
C. 10
D. 12
E. 16

Explanation:  Maximum dose in acute diarrhoea is 16mg in 24 hours.

Q4.
Question:
Which ONE of the agents listed should be used as first line treatment to obtain rate control in atrial fibrillation?
 
A. Amiodarone
B. Amlodipine
C. Digoxin
D. Answer Bisoprolol
E. Verapamil

Explanation: NICE Guidelines recommend a beta blocker as first line for rate control in atrial fibrillation

Q5.
Question:
Which ONE of the following drugs should be omitted in order to have the greatest reduction in risk of complications associated with the insertion of an epidural catheter?
 
A. Candesartan
B. Levothyroxine
C. Answer Dabigatran
D. Gliclazide
E. Dalteparin

Explanation: NOACs carry a risk of causing epidural haematoma (collection of blood in between skull and dura matter). No evidence of a risk with LMWH

Q6. 
Question:
Mr W, who weighs 70kg, has recently started on phenytoin for the treatment of status epilepticus at a dose of 20mg/kg

What should the total plasma-phenytoin concentration range for optimum response be?
 
A. 5-10 micrograms/litre
B. 10-15 micrograms/litre
C. Answer 10-20 mg/litre
D. 20-25 mg/litre
E. 15-30 mg/litre

Explanation: The usual total plasma-phenytoin concentration for optimum response is 10-20 mg/litre (or 40-80 micromol/litre).


Q7.
Question:
Mr PD, a 67-year-old who has been admitted to your ward for routine surgery had a past medical history of Parkinson’s disease and hypertension. He currently takes Madopar 250mg TDS and Amlodipine 5mg OM.

Which one of the following medications is the most appropriate to treat his post-operative nausea and vomiting?
 
A. Answer Cyclizine
B. Haloperidol
C. Metoclopramide
D. Perphenazine
E. Prochlorperazine

Explanation: All options except A carry a risk of extrapyramidal side effects. Haloperidol, perphenazine, prochlorperazine and metoclopramide block dopamine receptors. Domperidone would be the first line but is not presented in the list. Domperidone is a dopamine receptor antagonist but does not cross the blood brain barrier.

Q8. 
Question:
A patient comes into your pharmacy to speak to you. They have recently started taking theophylline a few weeks and think they are experiencing a side effect due to the drug.
Which of the following could be caused by theophylline?
 
A. Constipation
B. Tremor
C. Increased appetite
D. Answer Diarrhoea
E. Dizziness

Explanation: Theophylline side effects include: Arrhythmias; CNS stimulation; convulsions; diarrhoea; gastric irritation; headache; insomnia; nausea; palpitation; tachycardia; vomiting.

Q9. 
Question: 
Mrs B comes into the pharmacy complaining of a sore mouth that she has developed over the past 24 hours. You notice on examination that she has red and raw cheeks and tongue. Upon questioning you find that she has newly started Clenil Modulite inhaler (beclomethasone dipropionate) 2 weeks ago. You send Mrs B to the GP. 
The GP contacts you and asks what would be the most appropriate initial treatment for Mrs B?
 
A. Co-amoxiclav 500/125ng TDS
B. Strepsil lozenges
C. Itraconazole 100mg BD
D. Fluconazole 50mg OD
E. Answer Nystatin (100,000 units/mL) 1mL QDS

Explanation: Mrs B has oral thrush due to her newly prescribed Clenil Modulite inhaler (beclomethasone). Initial treatment should be with nystatin or miconazole. Fluconazole is effective for unresponsive infections or if a topical anti-fungal cannot be used or if the patient has dry mouth.

Q10.
Question: 
At Mrs A’s annual review, it is found that her HbA1c is much higher than usual. You are asked if this could be caused by changes in her medication.

Which of the following drugs that Mrs A has been started on in the last 3 months, is the most likely to have caused the change in her result?

A. Aspirin
B. Ibuprofen
C. Lisinopril
D. Answer: Prednisolone
E. Warfarin

Explanation: Prednisolone has glucocorticoid activity. Glucocorticoids have a side effect of causing insulin resistance and hyperglycaemia.

Q11.
Question: 
A 3-week-old baby with bouts of extreme crying during which he pulls his legs up to his chest and goes red in the face. The symptoms began yesterday but the child is otherwise well. His mother claims he is otherwise well and the pharmacist is aware of no other symptoms.

Which of the following options is most appropriate?
 
A. Recommend a product containing ispaghula husk
B. Recommend lactulose
C. Answer Recommend a product containing simethicone
D. Recommend Senna liquid
E. Refer urgently to a GP

Explanation: The symptoms describe COLIC. Simethicone drops, such as Infacol, are a supplement that can be added to your baby's bottle or breast milk before a feed. The drops are designed to help release bubbles of trapped air in your baby's digestive system.

Q12. 
Question: 
Aspirin should not be given to children under the age of 16 due to the risk of developing Reye’s syndrome.
Which ONE of the following signs and symptoms is least likely to occur?
 
A. Vomiting
B. Seizures
C. Answer Muscle aches
D. Raised white cell count
E. Delirium

Explanation: Initial symptoms of Reye’s syndrome can include persistent, effortless vomiting, lack of interest/enthusiasm and a loss of energy, drowsiness, rapid breathing and seizures. As the condition progresses, the symptoms may become more severe and wide ranging and can include personality changes such as extreme irritability, aggressive behaviour, delirium and coma. LFTs and WCC are normally raised.

Q13. 
Question: 
Mr PD regularly drives large vehicles for transporting goods. He comes into the pharmacy asking you for advice on which drugs can affect driving, as there are new drug-driving laws published.
Which of the following drugs may cause a sudden onset of sleep?
 
A. Lansoprazole
B. Epinephrine
C. Pyrazinamide
D. Answer Co-beneldopa

Explanation: Excessive daytime sleepiness and sudden onset of sleep can occur with levodopa. Patients starting treatment with these drugs should be warned of the risk and of the need to exercise caution when driving or operating machinery. Those who have experienced excessive sedation or sudden onset of sleep should refrain from driving or operating machines until these effects have stopped occurring.

Q14.
Question: 
Mr S has a new prescription for a salbutamol 100mcg MDI. The pharmacist checks his inhaler technique and discusses the potential side effects.

Which one of the following is not an established side effect associated with salbutamol therapy?
 
A. Answer Hyperkalaemia
B. Fine tremor
C. Muscle cramps
D. Palpitation
E. Tachycardia

Explanation: Salbutamol can cause hypokalaemia and can be used for the treatment of hyperkalaemia (unlicensed).

Q15.
Question: 
Mr Moss Keto, has come to your travel clinic at the pharmacy. He believes he needs some anti-malaria tablets, before his travel to a country which has a high prevalence of malaria. Mr Moss Keto gives you a list of the medications he is currently taking as listed below:
▪ Sertraline 200mg OD for severe anxiety
▪ Propranolol 40mg TDS for severe anxiety

Which of the following anti-malarial medications would be the LEAST suitable for Mr Moss Keto based on his medication and clinical history?
 
A. Chloroquine
B. Chloroquine with proguanil
C. Answer: Mefloquine
D. Proguanil
E: Doxycycline

Explanation: Mefloquine is contraindicated in people with a current or previous history of depression, generalized anxiety disorder, psychosis, schizophrenia, suicide attempts, suicidal thoughts, self-endangering behaviour or any other major psychiatric disorders.

Q16.
Question: 
Which of the below would be considered as a mineralocorticoid side effect?

A. Sodium loss
B. Peptic ulceration
C. Osteoporosis
D. Answer Hypertension
E Hyperkalaemia

Explanation: Mineralocorticoid side effects include hypertension, sodium retention, water retention, potassium loss, calcium loss


Q17.
Question: 
A patient on your ward weighs 84 kg and is being treated with gentamicin at a dose of 7 mg/kg once daily.

Her serum gentamicin levels are measured and are found to be high, so you recommend a 25% reduction in her next dose. You have gentamicin available as 240 mg/80 mL infusion bags

What volume of gentamicin 240 mg/80 mL solution for infusion is required for her next dose?

A. 127ml
B. 1.84ml
C. 14.7ml
D. 167ml
E Answer 147mL

Explanation: Original dose = 84 x 7 = 588 mg.
If we are to decrease her dose by 25%, the new dose will be 588 x 0.75 = 441 mg.
The strength of the infusion is 240 mg/80 mL; therefore 441 mg is in (441/240) x 80 = 147 mL

Q18.
Question:
Mr AS is started on Sulfasalazine 1g FOUR times a day for the initial treatment of active Crohn’s disease.

Which of the ADRs listed does Mr AS need to be counselled about?
 
A. Bradycardia
B. Answer Sore throat
C. Haematuria
D. Myopathy
E. Drowsiness

Explanation: Blood disorders – patients receiving aminosalicylates and their carers should be advised to report any UNEXPLAINED BLEEDING, BRUISING, PURPURA, SORE THROAT, FEVER OR MALAISE that occurs during treatment

Q19.
Question:
Mr DVT has been experiencing recurrent deep-vein thrombosis. He has been taking warfarin for several months. His last three INR readings have been stable at 2.4.
What should his INR target be?
 
A. 2
B. 2.5
C. 3
D. Answer 3.5
E. 4.5

Explanation: INR of 3.5 for recurrent deep-vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism in patients currently receiving anticoagulation and with an INR above 2.

Q20.
Question:
Mrs T normally takes carbamazepine.
Which of the below side effects should she urgently report to the doctor?
 
A. Hirsuitism
B. Hyponatraemia
C. Nausea
D. Answer Unexplained bruising or bleeding
E. Diarrhoea

Explanation: Carbamazepine can commonly cause blood, hepatic or skin disorders. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognise signs of blood, liver or skin disorders, and advised to seek immediate medical attention if symptoms such as fever, rash, mouth ulcers, bruising, or bleeding develop.


Q21.
Question:
A patient comes into the pharmacy with his 4-year-old daughter with a prescription for Seretide 50 Evohaler (salmeterol and fluticasone). The dose states TWO puffs TWICE a day with a spacer.

Which of the following actions would be the most appropriate?
 
A. Answer Return prescription to prescriber for alternative brand
B. Contact prescriber to discuss supply of unlicensed medicines
C. Contact prescriber to reduce dose to ONE puff TWICE a day
D. Contact prescriber to reduce dose to TWO puffs ONCE a day
E. Return prescription to prescriber alternative inhalation device

Explanation: Salmeterol is not licensed for use in children under 5 years old.

Q22.
Question:
Mrs S, a 36-year-old lady who is 1 month pregnant suffers from morning sickness. She has been experiencing a burning sensation upon urination and has a slightly elevated temperature. The doctor has decided to start her on antibiotics while waiting for her urine specimen culture testing results. Mrs S has no regular medication and is otherwise healthy.
Which of the following antibiotics would be the most suitable for Mrs S to start taking while the doctor awaits the results of the culture?
 
A. Trimethoprim
B. Answer Cefalexin
C. Methenamine hippurate
D. Doxycycline
E. Ciprofloxacin

Explanation: Uncomplicated lower UTIs often respond to trimethoprim or nitrofurantoin, or alternatively, amoxicillin, ampicillin or oral cephalosporin. Suggested duration of treatment is 7 days, but a short course (e.g. 3 days) is usually adequate in women. Trimethoprim would be appropriate but it is teratogenic and should be avoided in the first trimester of pregnancy.

Q23.
Question:
Mrs H is a 54-year-old woman who presents in the acute medicine unit at her local hospital complaining of a number of symptoms. They suspect it could be acute kidney injury (AKI).

Which one of the following symptoms is Mrs H most likely to have presented with that would indicate acute kidney injury?

A. Fever
B. Ascites
C. Arm pain
D. Answer Oliguria
E. Palpitations

Explanation: Oliguria is the production of abnormally small amounts of urine. It is one of the symptoms of AKI alongside oedema (legs, ankles and around the eyes), fatigue, shortness of breath, confusion, nausea, seizures, chest pain or pressure and coma (severe).

Q24.
Question:
Mr H has a diagnosis of Type 2 diabetes from a few months ago. He has been finding it very difficult to control his glucose levels. The doctor has decided to start him on a new anti-diabetic drug. Mr H is a bus driver and is concerned that this new medication will affect his ability to drive. When counselling Mr H, you tell him that he can drive but should be wary of hypoglycaemia and should try and avoid it.

Which of the following medications has Mr H most likely been started on?
A. Acarbose
B. Answer Glipizide
C. Pioglitazone
D. Metformin
E. Sitagliptin

Explanation: Glipizide is a sulfonylurea and they are known to cause hypoglycaemia. They act mainly by augmenting insulin secretion and consequently are effective only when some residual pancreatic beta-cell activity is present.

Q25.
Question:
You need to administer amoxicillin by intravenous injection to a patient at a dose of 1 g every 6 hours. You have amoxicillin 1 g vials available, which should be reconstituted to a strength of 50 mg/mL.

The displacement value of amoxicillin is 0.4 mL per 500 mg.

What volume of liquid should be added to the vial to produce a solution of the required strength for a single dose?

Give your answer to one decimal place.

A. Answer 19.2 mL
B. 8 mL
C. 2 mL
D. 9.2 mL
E. 18.2 mL

Explanation: 500 mg of amoxicillin displaces 0.4 mL of liquid; therefore 1 g displaces 0.8 mL.
The final strength of the solution should be 50 mg/mL; therefore, the final volume needs to be 20 mL since the vial contains 1000 mg.
The volume required is therefore 20-0.8 = 19.2 mL

Q26.
Question:
Which of the following types of insulin is classed as long acting?
A. Insulin Isophane
B. Insulin Aspart
C. Insulin Lispro
D. Answer Insulin Glargine
E. Novorapid

Explanation:
Isophane - intermediate acting
Aspart and Lispro - rapid acting
Novorapid is another name for Insulin Aspart

Q27.
Question:
Mrs H is a 55-year-old woman who suffers from Type 2 Diabetes for which she takes Metformin 500mg THREE times a day. She presents in the pharmacy complaining of painful lesions in her mouth that often bleed when she rubs them. She has had these symptoms for the past 10 days and has noticed that the number of lesions have increased and the pain has become progressively worse. Upon examination, you notice a number of white patches on her tongue.

Which of the following is the most appropriate action for you to take?

A. Advise Mrs H that this is a normal side effect of her medication and that she could use paracetamol to ease the pain
B. Sell her Bonjela oral gel and advise her to apply it to the lesions up to 8 times a day
C. Advise Mrs H that she is suffering from mouth ulcers and using an antibacterial mouthwash may help
D. Sell her Nystatin oral suspension and advise her to apply 1mL to the lesion FOUR times a day for 7 days
E. Answer Advise Mrs H to see her GP as her medication may need to be reviewed

Explanation: Mrs H has mouth ulcers. This is not a side effect of metformin and therefore could be potentially serious.

Q28.
Question:
Miss O, a 23-year-old lady, has recently been diagnosed with hypothyroidism. She presents at the pharmacy with a prescription for levothyroxine 50mcg daily.

Which of the following is the least appropriate advice to give Miss O taking the levothyroxine tablets?

A. You should not take antacids at the same time as levothyroxine
B. You should wait at least 30 minutes after taking your levothyroxine tablets before you drink coffee or tea
C. If you are taking iron supplements, you should leave a 2-hour gap between taking iron and levothyroxine
D. Calcium salts can reduce the absorption of levothyroxine
E. Answer Levothyroxine is best taken in the morning with breakfast

Explanation: 
Options A, B, C, and D are all appropriate advice because they address specific interactions that can affect the absorption of levothyroxine. 
Option E, however, is not appropriate advice: While it is generally recommended to take levothyroxine on an empty stomach, some patients may prefer to take it with food to avoid gastrointestinal side effects.


Q29.
Question:
Mrs G’s doctor suspects that she may have Type 2 diabetes and it is decided that a blood test should be taken to see what her HbA1C levels are.

Which of the following HbA1C values would indicate a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes?

A. Answer 49 mmol/mol
B. 45 mmol/mol
C. 43 mmol/mol
D. 41 mmol/mol
E. 40 mmol/mol

Explanation: HbA1C values between 42-47 mmol/mol (5.5-6.4%) indicate prediabetes, while values below 42 mmol/mol (5.5%) are considered normal. Above 48mmol/mol indicates Type 2 Diabetes.



Q30.
Question:
Ms W is taking regular oral hydrocortisone for the foreseeable future as he has been diagnosed with Addison’s disease. You have to counsel him appropriately on the use of steroids.

Which of the following is not a recognised side effect of corticosteroid therapy?

A. Answer Hypoglycaemia
B. Diabetes
C. Hypertension
D. Osteoporosis
E. Weight gain

Explanation: Corticosteroid therapy can cause hyperglycaemia due to insulin resistance

Q31.
Question:
Mrs T is 60-years-old and has been taking Pioglitazone 20mg daily for the last 12 weeks in addition to her regular dose of Gliclazide 40mg once daily. She enters your pharmacy complaining that she is feeling really tired, along with abdominal pain and has darker urine than usual. She also mentions feeling sick yesterday.

Which of the following is the most appropriate advice for Mrs T?

A. She should see the GP as the dose of pioglitazone may need to be reduced
B. She should see the GP as the dose of pioglitazone may need to be increased
C. The symptoms described are not known to be caused by pioglitazone
D. Answer Stop taking pioglitazone straight away and see her GP as soon as possible
E. She is experiencing a side-effect of pioglitazone and whilst safe to continue taking it she may wish to see her GP for an alternative

Explanation: The European Medicines Agency has advised that there is a small increased risk of bladder cancer associated with pioglitazone use. Patients already receiving treatment with pioglitazone should be assessed for risk factors of bladder cancer and treatment should be reviewed after 3-6 months. Patients should be advised to report promptly any haematuria, dysuria, or urinary urgency during treatment.

Q32.
Question:
You are an independent prescriber running a diabetic clinic. Ms P has recently been diagnosed with gestational diabetes. She has failed to respond adequately to two weeks restriction of energy and carbohydrate intake and an increase in physical activity. Her fasting blood glucose is 6.1 mmol/L.

Which of the following is most appropriate advice for this patient?

A. Ms P should be initiated on Metformin
B. Ms P should be initiated on insulin
C. Ms P should be initiated on Gliclazide
D. Offer no treatment and refer Ms P to a dietician
E. Answer Offer no treatment and advise Ms P to continue with a healthy diet during pregnancy and emphasise to eat foods with a low glycaemic index.

Explanation: Women with gestational diabetes who have a fasting plasma glucose below 7 mmol/L at diagnosis, should first attempt a change in diet and exercise alone in order to reduce blood-glucose. If blood-glucose targets are not met within 1 to 2 weeks, metformin hydrochloride may be prescribed [unlicensed use]. Insulin may be prescribed if metformin is contraindicated or not acceptable, and may also be added to treatment if metformin is not effective alone.

Q33.
Question:
Miss L comes to your pharmacy as she is going to Dubai and wants to buy a tanning lotion. You check her MR and notice that one of her drugs causes phototoxicity.

Which of the following is the most likely to cause this effect?
 
A. Propranolol
B. Answer Doxycycline
C. Lisinopril
D. Simvastatin
E. Lactulose

Explanation: Doxycycline can cause photosensitivity reactions and patients are advised to stay out of direct sunlight and wear adequate sun protection.

Q34.
Question:
A 60kg patient is prescribed Gentamicin 5mg/kg once daily. Gentamicin injections 80mg/2mL are available on the ward in 2mL ampoules.

How many ampoules will be required to make up the prescribed dose?
 
A. 3
B. Answer 4
C. 5
D. 6
E. 8

Explanation: Calculate the total dose of gentamicin needed:
Total dose = 5 mg/kg x 60 kg = 300 mg
Calculate the volume of gentamicin needed:
Volume = Total dose / Concentration
300 mg / 80 mg/2 mL = 7.5 mL 
Since each ampoule contains 2 mL of gentamicin, we need to divide the volume needed by 2 to get the number of ampoules required:
Number of ampoules = Volume needed / 2
7.5 mL / 2 mL = 3.75
We need to round this up to the nearest whole number, which is 4.

Q35.
Question:
Mr H has been admitted to hospital with a lower respiratory tract infection. He is awaiting microbiology results on his sputum; an atypical pathogen is not suspected.

Which of the following is the most likely cause of the respiratory tract infection?
 
A. Clostridium botulinum
B. Legionella pneumophillia
C. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
D. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
E. Answer Streptococcus pneumoniae

Explanation: Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of lower respiratory tract infections. Mycoplasma pneumoniae is also a common cause however this is an atypical pathogen.

Q36.
Question:
Mr TB comes into the pharmacy presenting his prescription for isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide and pyridoxine. He knows that rifampicin, ethambutol, isoniazid and pyrazinamide are antibiotics but does not know why he has been given pyridoxine as he tells you it is Vitamin B. You begin to explain that he is taking the pyridoxine to prevent a certain side effect.

Which one of the following adverse effects of isoniazid can be prevented by the prophylactic use of pyridoxine?
 
A. Answer Peripheral neuropathy
B. Hepatitis
C. Vomiting
D. Blood disorders
E. Skin rash

Explanation: Pyridoxine is prescribed alongside isoniazid to prevent isoniazid-induced neuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy is a common side effect of isoniazid.

Q37.
Question:
Mrs TR has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis and is being treated with an intravenous infusion of gentamicin, administered once daily. She received her first dose 21 hours ago. Her next dose is in 3 hours.

Which tests should be performed 18-24 hours after the first dose of gentamicin?
 
A. C-reactive protein concentration
B. Audiometry
C. Serum creatinine concentration
D. Answer Serum gentamicin concentration
E. Estimated glomerular filtration rate

Explanation: For once daily dosing, gentamicin levels should be checked 20 hours post dose. The level should be below 1mg/L before the next dose can be administered.

Q38.
Question:
Mrs U 35-years-old who has come to the pharmacy complaining of muscle aches and abdominal pain since last night. She has experienced a burning sensation when passing urine this morning and her urine has been cloudy. She says she has a strong and frequent urge to urinate.

What is the most likely cause of Mrs K’s symptoms?
 
A. Pyelonephritis
B. Schistosomiasis
C. Gonorrhoea
D. Chlamydia
E. Answer Urinary tract infection

Explanation: The symptoms described are classic of a urinary tract infection.

Q39.
Question:
Mrs U has been diagnosed with a urinary tract infection. Her medical history shows rheumatoid arthritis, hypothyroidism and severe allergy to Flucloxacillin. She is taking levothyroxine 125mcg with 100mcg on alternate days, folic acid 5mg once weekly methotrexate 20mg injection.

What would be the most suitable therapy to treat Mrs K’s symptoms?
 
A. Cefuroxime
B. Amoxicillin
C. Co-amoxiclav
D. Trimethoprim
E. Answer Nitrofurantoin

Explanation: As she is penicillin allergic she cannot have amoxicillin or co-amoxiclav. Trimethoprim and nitrofurantoin are first line for uncomplicated urinary tract infections, however because she is using methotrexate which is a folate antagonist she cannot use trimethoprim because this is also a folate antagonist. Trimethoprim is predicted to increase the risk of side-effects when given with methotrexate. Manufacturer advises avoid. Severe interaction.

Q40.
Question:
Miss L is a 9-year-old and has been admitted to your ward with infective exacerbation of cystic fibrosis. Her sputum sample has returned from microbiology and the following medication has been prescribed: Ceftazidime, Tobramycin and Flucloxacillin.
Which of the following organisms are the prescribed antibiotics most likely to be covering?
 
A. Haemophilus and staphylococcus aureus
B. Haemophilus and streptococcus pneumoniae
C. Pseudomonas and streptococcus pneumoniae
D. Answer Staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas
E. Streptococcus and staphylococcus aureus

Explanation: Tobramycin is active pseudomonas and Flucloxacillin is commonly used for staphylococcal infections.

Q41.
Question:
Mrs AG, a 42-year-old female, is in hospital with an infection. The doctor prescribes an antibiotic for this lady.

Which one of the following antibiotics would you have to advise Mrs AG that it may colour the urine orange-red?
 
A. Amoxicillin
B. Ciprofloxacin
C. Metronidazole
D. Oxytetracycline
E. Answer Rifampicin

Explanation: Rifampicin colours body fluids orange/red.

Q42.
Question:
Mr AB who is 82 years old has been in hospital for 3 weeks for the treatment of high severity community acquired pneumonia. He has developed an infection with Clostridium Difficile. Mr AB has no known drug allergies.

Which is the single most appropriate antibiotic to treat the Clostridium Difficile infection?
 
A. Co-amoxiclav tablets
B. Co-trimoxazole tablets
C. Doxycycline capsules
D. Erythromycin tablets
E. Answer Vancomycin capsules

Explanation: Oral metronidazole or oral vancomycin is used for the treatment of clostridium difficile infection.

Q43.
Question:
Mrs M, who is 64 years old, has been admitted to hospital due to an infective exacerbation of COPD. She has been prescribed nebulised medication to relieve her symptoms. Nurse R commented that certain nebulised medication can cause acute angle-closure glaucoma if the patient's eyes are not protected.

Which ONE of the following medications is the nurse referring to?
 
A. Budesonide
B. Answer Ipratropium
C. Salbutamol
D. Fluticasone
E. Terbutaline

Explanation: BNF Caution: Acute angle-closure glaucoma has been reported with nebulised ipratropium, particularly when given with nebulised salbutamol (and possibly other beta-2 agonists); care needed to protect the patient’s eyes from nebulised drug or from drug powder.

Q44.
Question:
Mr CP, who is 67 years old, is currently suffering from persistent breathlessness due to his COPD. He has already been previously prescribed and uses a salbutamol inhaler which is no longer controlling his symptoms. His FEV1 is 55%.

Which ONE of the following is the most appropriate treatment option?
 
A. Short-acting muscarinic antagonist
B. Domiciliary oxygen
C. Long acting beta2 agonist plus inhaled corticosteroid
D. Answer Long acting muscarinic agonist
E. Long acting muscarinic antagonist plus long acting beta2 agonist plus inhaled corticosteroid

Explanation: If FEV1 is greater than 50%, the next step would be to add a LAMA or a LABA alone.

Q45.
Question:
Mr T is a 54-year-old male who has been admitted to hospital after persistent breathlessness and has been diagnosed with having an acute severe exacerbation of his COPD. He has been given a slow intravenous injection of aminophylline followed by a maintenance dose via intravenous infusion.

Which ONE of the following is the most appropriate plasma-drug concentration required for satisfactory bronchodilation?
 
A. 10-20 mcg/L
B. Answer 10-20 mg/L
C. 55-110 mcg/L
D. 20-30 mg/L
E. 15-20 mg/L

Explanation: In most individuals, a plasma-theophylline concentration of 10-20mg/litre (55-110mcg/L) is required for satisfactory bronchodilation, although a lower plasma-theophylline concentration of 5-15mg/litre may be effective. Adverse effects can occur within the range 10-20mg/litre and both the frequency and severity increase at concentrations above 20mg/litre.

Q46.
Question:
A 48-year-old female patient comes into A&E as she has inadvertently taken too many of her theophylline tablets. Tests carried out immediately after the patient is admitted show a peak theophylline serum concentration of 60mg/L. Half-life for theophylline is 8 hours.

How long will it take for the serum concentration to reach 7.5mg/L if they take no further doses?
 
A. 16 hours
B. Answer 24 hours
C. 32 hours
D. 40 hours
E. 48 hours

Explanation: After 8 hours, the level will be 30mg, a further 8 hours later 15mg and a further 8 hours later 7.5mg.

Q47.
Question:
A patient on your ward asks you to explain how to use his inhaler. You check his medication locker and find Symbicort® (Budesonide/Formoterol).
Which of the following instructions would you give regarding Symbicort® (Budesonide/Formoterol)?
 
A. Inhale slowly and gently
B. Inhale slowly and deeply
C. Answer Inhale quickly and deeply
D. Inhale quickly and shallowly
E. Inhale slowly and shallowly

Explanation: Symbicort® (budesonide/formoterol) is a dry powder inhaler and should be inhaled quickly and deeply to ensure adequate delivery to the lungs.

Q48.
Question: Can oral and inhaled corticosteroids be used as normal in pregnant women for asthma management?
 
A. Answer Yes
B. No
C: Only SABAs
D: All except SABAs
E: All except steroids

Explanation: SABAs, LABAs, oral and inhaled corticosteroids, sodium Cromoglicate and nedocromil sodium, and oral and intravenous theophylline (with appropriate monitoring) can be used as normal during pregnancy.

Q49.
Question:
What is the correct statement about Qvar and Clenil Modulite CFC Free?
 
A. They are interchangeable beclometasone inhalers
B. Clenil is TWICE as potent than Qvar
C. Both inhalers have the same amount of particles
D. Does not need to be prescribed by brand name
E. Answer Qvar has extra fine particles

Explanation: Both brands are not interchangeable. Qvar is TWICE as potent as Clenil (CFC containing inhalers) and Qvar has extra fine particles compared to Clenil

Q50.
Question:
When taking theophylline, which medication can interact and cause a risk of hypokalaemia?
 
A. Montelukast
B. Answer Bumetanide
C. Warfarin
D. Rifampicin
E. Metoclopramide

Explanation: There is an increased risk of hypokalaemia when theophylline is taken with loop (bumetanide, furosemide, torasemide)/thiazide (bendroflumethiazide) diuretics, corticosteroids and b2 agonists.

Q51.
Question:
A drug has both opioid agonist and antagonist properties. Sublingually, it is an effective analgesic for 6-8 hours. Its effects are only partially reversed by naloxone hydrochloride.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Tramadol
B. Pethidine
C. Dipipanone hydrochloride
D. Gabapentin
E. Answer Buprenorphine

Explanation: Buprenorphine has both opioid agonist and antagonist properties. Sublingually, it is an effective analgesic for 6-8 hours. Its effects are only partially reversed by naloxone hydrochloride.

Q52.
Question:
An antiepileptic which carries an increased risk of cleft palate if taken in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Answer Topiramate
B. Carbamazepine
C. Phenobarbital
D. Tolfenamic acid
E. Gabapentin

Explanation: Topiramate carries an increased risk of cleft palate if taken in the first trimester of pregnancy.

Q53.
Question:
Treatment with this drug is associated with impulse control disorders, including pathological gambling, binge eating and hypersexuality.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Varenicline
B. Selegiline
C. Answer Apomorphine
D. Promethazine
E. Rasagiline

Explanation: Treatment with dopamine-receptor agonists are associated with impulse control disorders, including pathological gambling, binge eating, and hypersexuality. Patients and their carers should be informed about the risk of impulse control disorders. If the patient develops an impulse control disorder, the dopamine-receptor agonist or levodopa should be withdrawn or the dose reduced until the symptoms resolve.


Q54.
Question:
The drug gives rise to an extremely unpleasant systemic reaction after the ingestion of alcohol because it causes the accumulation of acetaldehyde in the body. Symptoms can occur within 10 minutes of ingesting alcohol and include flushing of the face, throbbing headache and tachycardia.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Answer Disulfiram
B. Acamprosate calcium
C. Tetrabenazine
D. Rasagiline
E. Promethazine

Explanation: Disulfiram works by inhibiting the enzyme acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, which means that many of the effects of a “hangover” are felt immediately after alcohol is consumed. Disulfiram plus alcohol, even small amounts, produce flushing, throbbing in head and neck, throbbing headache, nausea, copious vomiting, sweating, palpitation, dyspnoea, hyperventilation, tachycardia and confusion. It is used to treat alcohol dependence.


Q55.
Question:
The drug is indicated for conscious sedation for dental procedures 30-60 minutes before the procedure.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Lorazepam
B. Promethazine
C. Answer Temazepam
D. Methadone
E. Carbamazepine

Explanation: BNF monograph for Temazepam: Conscious sedation for dental procedures, by mouth, 15-30mg, to be administered 30-60 minutes before procedure.


Q56.
Question:
The drug is a potent dopamine-receptor agonist indicated in advanced Parkinson’s disease for patients experiencing ‘off’ periods. The patient must be taught to self-administer the medicine by subcutaneous injection at the first sign of an ‘off’ episode.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Tetrabenazine
B. Selegiline
C. Co-careldopa
D. Answer Apomorphine
E. Bromocriptine

Explanation: Apomorphine is a potent dopamine-receptor agonist indicated in advanced Parkinson’s disease for patients experiencing ‘off’ periods. The patient must be taught to self-administer the medicine by subcutaneous injection at the first sign of an ‘off’ episode.

Q57.
Question:
Mr PD has been diagnosed with moderate dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease. The consultant has started him on a medicine which is licensed as a twice daily dose by mouth.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Agomelatine
B. Memantine
C. Answer Rivastigmine
D. Galantamine
E. Donepezil

Explanation: Rivastigmine is the only licensed acetylcholinesterase inhibitor used for moderate dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease. The other acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are unlicensed.

Q58.
Question:
A patient on a medium secure ward at a hospital specialising in mental health is being trialed with a first-generation antipsychotic. It is only effective for the positive symptoms and causes anticholinergic side effects.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Lithium
B. Answer Chlorpromazine
C. Valproic acid
D. Lofexidine
E. Aripiprazole

Explanation: In the list above, chlorpromazine is the only first-generation antipsychotic.

Q59.
Question:
Mrs M has been prescribed propranolol 160mg LA capsules (1 ON) for migraine prophylaxis. When dispensing the prescription, a notification appears on your PMR system that she is currently taking amiodarone regularly for the last 8 months.
What would be the most appropriate course of action for you to take?
 
A. Contact the prescriber and recommend to reduce the strength of propranolol
B. Contact the prescriber and recommend to change the amiodarone
C. Answer Contact the prescriber and recommend to change to an alternative migraine prophylaxis
D. Dispense the prescription and counsel the patient on the possible side effects of amiodarone
E. Dispense the prescription and counsel the patient on the use of the LA formulation i.e. swallow whole and do not chew/rush

Explanation: It would be most appropriate to change propranolol to an alternative as there is a major interaction between propranolol and amiodarone. Amiodarone is predicted to increase the risk of cardiovascular side effects when given with propranolol. Manufacturer advises use with caution or avoid.


Q60.
Question:
Mr T, a 35-year-old present at the pharmacy complaining about pain in his upper arm and shoulder. He was moving heavy items at home. He asks for a suitable analgesic and he has not taken anything yet. He is on the following:
▪ Ramipril 10mg
▪ Amlodipine 5mg
Which of the following OTC analgesics would be most appropriate to recommend?
 
A. Ibuprofen tablets
B. Naproxen tablets
C. Co-codamol tablets
D. Paracetamol effervescent tablets
E. Answer Paracetamol caplets

Explanation: Recommend paracetamol for pain first line OTC. NSAIDS are to be used in caution in hypertension. A less common side effects of NSAIDS is raised blood pressure.

Q61.
Question:
Mr W requires a 1-week course of H. Pylori eradication therapy previously diagnosed by their GP. He is allergic to penicillin (urticarial rash). His other medications include:
Clopidogrel 75mg once a day
Aspirin 75mg once a day
Bisoprolol 2.5mg once a day
Ramipril 5mg once a day
Which of the following regimes is most appropriate for Mr W’s eradication therapy?
 
A. Esomeprazole 20mg twice a day, Clarithromycin 250mg twice a day, Metronidazole 400mg twice a day
B. Answer Lansoprazole 30mg twice a day, Clarithromycin 250mg twice a day, Metronidazole 400mg twice a day
C. Omeprazole 20mg twice a day, Clarithromycin 250mg twice a day, Metronidazole 400mg twice a day
D. Pantoprazole 40mg twice a day, Amoxicillin 1g twice a day, Clarithromycin 500mg twice a day
E. Omeprazole 20mg four times a day, Clarithromycin 1g twice a day, metronidazole 800 mg twice a day

Explanation: Esomeprazole and omeprazole both reduce the efficacy of Clopidogrel. The patient is allergic to penicillin, so can’t have amoxicillin.


Q62.
Question:
Mr C who has been admitted to the hospital for emergency surgery. He normally takes dabigatran for atrial fibrillation. Surgeons need to quickly reverse the effects of his anticoagulant before operating. Mr C also takes candesartan and levothyroxine for hypertension and hypothyroidism.
Which one of the following agents is most suitable to use for reversal of the effects of dabigatran?
 
A. Answer Idarucizumab
B. Flumazenil
C. Naloxone
D. Phytomeniadone
E. Protamine

Explanation: Idarucizumab is a monoclonal antibody designed for the reversal of anticoagulant effects of dabigatran.

Q63.
Question:
Post-operatively, Mr C is returned to the ward with an epidural catheter in situ for his pain relief. In the evening, as Mr C is eating and drinking, he is prescribed all of his usual medications, as well as the post-operative medications, as per below.
Which ONE of the following drugs should be omitted in order to have the greatest reduction in risk of complications associated with the insertion of an epidural catheter?
 
A. Candesartan
B. Levothyroxine
C. Answer Dabigatran
D. Gliclazide
E. Dalteparin

Explanation: NOACs carry a risk of causing epidural haematoma (collection of blood in between skull and dura mater). No evidence of a risk with LMWH.

Q64.
Question:
You have recently qualified as an independent prescribing pharmacist and your competency is in acute stroke and transient ischaemic attacks.
Which of the following is the most appropriate use of aspirin?
 
A. Prevention of cardiovascular events in a healthy 25-year-old made with a strong history of early-onset heart disease
B. Answer Prevention of cardiovascular events in a COPD patient who has previously had a myocardial infarction
C. Prevention of cardiovascular events in a diabetic patient who has not already had a cardiovascular event
D. As an enteric coated tablet in patients with a history of gastric ulcer
E. As a capsule to treat episodes of acute pain

Explanation: A patient who has had a recent myocardial event is at a much higher risk of a cardiovascular event compared to someone who has not had any previous myocardial event regardless of their comorbidities.

Q65.
Question:
Mrs Jones has been prescribed a parenteral anticoagulant for prevention of venous thromboembolism. The doctor has decided to prescribe the low molecular weight heparin, tinzaparin.
What is the rationale for prescribing a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) in preference to unfractionated heparin?
 
A. Answer LMWH have a lower risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
B. LMWH allow people to have regular INR monitoring to ensure safety
C. LMWH are more effective at preventing thromboembolism
D. LMWH have a higher risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia

Explanation: To induce thrombocytopenia, a specific saccharide sequence needs to be present in the heparin formulation. This sequence is more commonly found in unfractionated heparin compared to low molecular weight heparin.

Q66.
Question:
Mr INR is a 62-year-old man who has been prescribed warfarin to treat myocardial infarction. He has been admitted into hospital with an INR of 10.4 with minor bleeding.
Which of the following is the most appropriate course of action?
 
A. Stop warfarin; give phytomenadione (vitamin K1) by slow IV injection; give dried prothrombin 25-50 units/kg
B. Stop warfarin; give phytomenadione (vitamin K1) by slow IV injection; repeat dose of phytomenadione if INR still too high after 24 hours; restart warfarin when INR <5.0
C. Stop warfarin; give phytomenadione (vitamin K1) by mouth using the IV preparation orally; repeat dose of phytomenadione if INR still too high after24 hours; restart warfarin when INR <5.0
D.Answer Stop warfarin; give phytomenadione (vitamin K1) by slow IV injection; restart warfarin when INR <5.0
E. Withhold 1 or 2 doses of warfarin and reduce subsequent maintenance

Explanation: If INR>8.0 and minor bleeding – stop warfarin; give phytomenadione (Vitamin K1) by slow IV injection; repeat dose of phytomenadione if INR still too high after 24 hours; restart warfarin when INR <5.0

Q67.
Question:
Mr G has been complaining of chest pain and has been diagnosed with angina. He has a previous diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Mr G has been complaining of severe headaches, which he has not experienced before.
Which one of the following medicines is most likely to be causing the headaches?
 
A. Aspirin
B. Enalapril
C. Rosuvastatin
D. Gliclazide
E. Answer Isosorbide mononitrate

Explanation: Common side effects of nitrates include dizziness; postural hypotension; tachycardia; throbbing headache.

Q68.
Question:
Mr Y is a 54-year-old man who was admitted to hospital 3 days ago with a diagnosis of heart failure. The medical team decide to start him on digoxin and after an oral loading dose he is maintained on 125 micrograms daily. Mr Y requires a blood test to assess his plasma digoxin concentration.
When is the most appropriate time to sample Mr Y’s blood to monitor his digoxin levels?
 
A. At least 8 hours after an oral dose has been administered
B. Between 2-3 hours after an oral dose has been administered
C. Answer At least 6 hours after an oral dose has been administered
D. Immediately after an oral dose has been administered
E. Thirty minutes after an oral dose has been administered

Explanation: BNF states that for plasma-digoxin concentration assay, blood should be taken at least 6 hours after a dose. Monitor serum electrolytes and renal function. Toxicity increased by electrolyte disturbances.

Q69.
Question:
Mr VF has been commenced on amiodarone in hospital for ventricular fibrillation. He comes to your community pharmacy 2 weeks after discharge to get a further supply. He complains that he is feeling tired and that his stools have changed from a dark brown to clay-coloured and wonders if this could be caused by the amiodarone.
What is the most appropriate advice for this patient?
 
A. The symptoms described are not known to be caused by amiodarone
B. Answer Stop taking the amiodarone immediately and see the GP as soon as possible
C. He should see the GP as the dose of amiodarone may need to be increased
D. He should see the GP as the dose of amiodarone may need to be decreased
E. He is experiencing a side effect of amiodarone but may want to speak to the GP about an alternative but keep taking the amiodarone until then

Explanation: Hepatotoxicity may occur while you are using this medicine. Stop using this medicine and check with your doctor right away if you are having more than one of these symptoms: abdominal pain or tenderness; clay-coloured stools; dark urine; decreased appetite; fever; headache; itching loss of appetite; nausea and vomiting; skin rash; swelling of the feet or lower legs; unusual tiredness or weakness; or yellow eyes or skin.

Q70.
Question:
A 6-year-old girl has been prescribed Trimovate cream for a bacterial skin infection on her feet. She has been advised to apply one application to both feet once daily for 14 days.
Trimovate contains clobetasone 17-butyrate 0.05% w/w, oxytetracycline 3.0% w/w as calcium oxytetracycline and nystatin 100,000 units per gram.
  
How many milligrams of oxytetracycline does a 30g tube of Trimovate cream contain? 

A. Answer 900mg
B. 0.3g
C. 30g
D. 900g
E. 3g

       
Explanation: The concentration of oxytetracycline is 3.0% w/w this means that 3 g of the drug is found in 100 g, i.e., 3 g in 100 g.

The question would like you to identify how many milligrams of oxytetracycline there are in a 30 g tube therefore you are required to complete some calculation steps.

Step one: 30 g/100 g = 0.3 g
Step two: 0.3 g x 3 g = 0.9 g of Oxytetracycline in 30 g tube
Step three: The question requires you to provide an answer in milligrams therefore 0.9 g x 1000 = 900 mg

Q71.
Question:
One of your palliative care patients is prescribed diamorphine 25 mg to be given subcutaneously over 24 hours using a syringe driver. The diamorphine infusion that is used contains 5 mg/mL.
What is the correct infusion rate in mL/hour that the syringe driver should be set at? Give your answer to one decimal place.

A. 25mL/hour
B. Answer 0.2 mL/hour
C. 2mL/hour
D. 2L/hour
E. 5mL/hour
      
Explanation: 25 mg over 24 hours
Infusion contains 5 mg/mL, therefore 5 mL needed over 24 hours = 0.20833mL/hour To one decimal place is 0.2 mL.


Q72.
Question:
You are given a prescription for a 4-year-old girl for cefalexin suspension to treat a lower urinary tract infection. She weighs 16.8 kg.
The dose for this indication is 12.5mg/kg twice daily for 3 days.
You have cefalexin 125mg/5mL suspension, pack size 100 mL bottles, in stock. You advise the child’s mother to discard any unused solution at the end of the course.
How much cefalexin 125mg/5mL suspension will be discarded at the end of the course?
Give your answer to one decimal place

A. 50.4mL
B. 504mL
C. Answer 49.6 mL
D. 420mL:
E. 496mL:

Explanation: 12.5 mg/kg x 16.8 kg = 210 mg per dose 210 mg x 2 times daily = 420 mg daily 420 mg x 3 days = 1260 mg for 3 days
Calculate the amount you would need to supply: 1260 mg/? mL = 125mg / 5mL
= 50.4 mL
Calculate amount that will be unused and discarded: 100 mL – 50.4 mL = 49.6 mL


Q73.
Question:
A patient who is a participant in a clinical trial has been administered with drug CA243- 201 as a treatment for a rare genetic disorder. The patient weighs 67kg and her initial serum concentration of the drug immediately after administration was 135 mg/L. The clearance rate of the drug is thought to be 8 mL/kg/minute.

What quantity of drug CA243-201, expressed in grams, will be cleared from her body 5.5 hours after administration? Give your answer to one decimal place.

A. Answer 23.9g
B. 23.8g
C. 238g
D. 239g
E. 67g

Explanation: Clearance rate is 8mL/kg/min x 67kg = 536 mL/minute.
5.5 hours = 330 minutes
536mL x 330mins = 176,880mL cleared in 5.5 hours
Serum concentration = 135mg/1,000mL at 0 hours, Xmg in 176,880mL. 176,880 mL = 176.88 L
Therefore 135 mg/L x 176.88 L = 23,878 mg, therefore Xmg = 23,878.8mg = 23.9g to one decimal place

Q74.
Question: 
A 54-year-old woman comes into your pharmacy with a prescription for chloramphenicol 0.5% minims for a severe eye infection. The instructions on the prescription state: ‘Place ONE drop into the LEFT eye SIX times a day for 10 days’.
Chloramphenicol 0.5% minims are available in boxes of 20 dose units. Each minim should be discarded after each use.
     
How many boxes of minims do you supply to this patient? 3 boxes

A. 30 boxes
B. 60 boxes
C. 10 boxes
D. 6 boxes
E. Answer 3 boxes

Explanation: 1 minim per use x 6 times daily = 6 minims per day 6 minims per day x 10 days treatment = 60 minims 60 minims / 20 doses per box = 3 boxes

Q75.
Question:
What volume of water must be added to 750 mL of a 5% w/v solution to produce a 1 in 1000 solution?
Give your answer in litres to two decimal places

A. 7.50L
B. 37.50L
C. 36.65mL
D. Answer 36.75L
E. 7.75mL

Explanation: Step 1 - Calculate the target solution Target = 1 in 1000
= 1 g in 1000 mL
0.1 g in 100 mL = 0.1% w/v
Step 2 - Calculate what we have We have 750mL of a 5% solution
Step 3 - Use the formula C1V1=C2V2
C1 x v1 = c2 x v2
5 x 750 = 0.1 x v2
V2 = 5 x 750/0.1 = 3750/0.1= 37,500 mL
750mL of a 5 % w/v solution can make 37,500mL of a 0.1%w/v (1 in 1000) solution.
Step 4 - Take away the amount of stock!!!!! Question asks for water only! Amount of water to be added is 37500 – 750 = 36,750 mL

Q76.
Question:
A 10-month-old girl has been prescribed omeprazole dispersible tablets for the management of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD).
The prescription contains the following information:
Omeprazole dispersible 20 mg tablets
Dose: Disperse a QUARTER of a tablet in 10mL of water and take ONCE DAILY. Quantity: 30 days’ supply.
   
How many tablets would you supply the patient? 

A. 4 tablets
B. 7 tablets
C. 6 tablets
D. Answer 8 tablets
E. 9 tablets
  
Explanation: The patient is to take a quarter (5mg) of Omeprazole 20mg dispersible tablets once a day.
One tablet will provide four doses; thus, one tablet would allow dose administrations for a total of four days.
For 30 days’ supply:
30 days / 4 days = 7.5 tablets
You will need to supply 8 tablets to provide 30 days of treatment.


Q77.
Question:
Whilst working for a large supplier of unlicensed medicines, you have been asked to give advice on the preparation of a new drug. You need to prepare 150mg of the drug, at a concentration of 6mg/mL. The displacement volume of the new drug is 0.5mL/50mg.
What volume of diluent is needed to produce the required concentration? Give your answer to one decimal place.

A. 1.5mL
B. 25mL
C. 6mL 
D. Answer 23.5 mL
E. 20mL

Explanation: The displacement volume = the volume occupied by a solute when added to a solution. The required concentration is 6mg/mL, therefore 25mL is needed for 150mg of drug.
If 50mg displaces 0.5mL of solution, this means 150mg would displace 1.5mL.
25mL – 1.5mL = 23.5mL

Q78.
Question:
A 50-year-old man enters the pharmacy with a prescription for effervescent potassium chloride and potassium bicarbonate tablets (Sando-K), two tablets to be taken three times for 3 days. Each Sando-K tablet contains 12 mmol of potassium, the diet of a healthy adult will provide a total intake of 100 mmol potassium.
If the patient takes the effervescent potassium as prescribed what percentage (%) of their daily intake of potassium will be provided by the Sando-K?

A. 24%
B. 15%
C. 50%
D. Answer 72%
E. 86%

Explanation: 12 mmol x 2 = 24 mmol 24 mmol x 3 = 72 mmol 72/100 = 0.72
0.72 x 100 = 72 %

Q79.
Question:
A patient with cellulitis is being discharged from hospital on flucloxacillin 500 mg four times daily to complete a 14-day treatment course.
Given that the patient has already had three full days of treatment of flucloxacillin, how many 250 mg capsules would you need to supply to complete the course?

A. Answer 88 capsules
B. 92 capsules
C. 112 capsules
D. 72 capsules
E. 11 capsules

Explanation: Total supply: 14 – 3 = 11 days treatment required therefore 11 x 4 x 2 = 88 capsules

Q80.
Question:
A drug produces analgesia by two mechanisms: an opioid effect and an enhancement of serotonergic and adrenergic pathways.
Which of the following is the drug most likely to be?
 
A. Buprenorphine
B. Pethidine
C. Dipipanone hydrochloride
D. Answer Tramadol
E. Codeine

Explanation: Tramadol is a centrally acting synthetic opioid analgesic that also enhances serotonergic and adrenergic neurotransmission.


Q81.
Question:
Mr GH, who weighs 90kg, was started on lithium carbonate at a dose of 600mg twice daily. His levels have been monitored for the past few weeks.
Which of the following is the target serum-lithium concentration that should be achieved?
 
A. 0.1-0.5 mg/litre
B. Answer 0.4-1 mmol/litre
C. 0.2-1 mmol/litre
D. 0.8-1 mmol/litre
E. 1-2 mmol/litre 

Explanation: Lithium salts have a narrow therapeutic/toxic ratio and should therefore not be prescribed unless facilities for monitoring serum-lithium concentrations are available. Samples should be taken 12 HOURS after the dose to achieve a serum-lithium concentration of 0.4-1 mmol/litre. A target serum-lithium concentration of 0.8-1 mmol/litre is recommended for acute episodes of mania.

Q82.
Question:
Mrs Z, a 67-year-old woman has been admitted to hospital following a fall. She has been feeling very weak and drowsy recently and appears to be confused. The doctor has sent her for further testing. 

Which one of Mrs V's medication is the most likely cause of her fall?
 
A. Ibuprofen
B. Lansoprazole
C. Amlodipine
D. Answer Fluoxetine
E. Atorvastatin

Explanation: Hyponatraemia (usually in the elderly and possibly due to inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone) has been associated with all types of antidepressants; however, it has been reported more frequently with SSRIs than with other antidepressants. Hyponatraemia should be considered in all patients who develop drowsiness, confusion, or convulsions while taking antidepressants.

Q83.
Question:
Mr NS is a 46-year-old male who has been taking Lithium Carbonate 400mg (Priadel) tablets for the past 15 years for his bipolar disorder. He has come into the pharmacy with a prescription. He tells you that the GP told him to come back immediately if he notices signs of diarrhoea, vomiting, drowsiness or muscle twitching.
Which of the following is most likely to be on the prescription?
 
A. Amoxicillin
B. Clozapine
C. Answer Ibuprofen
D. Theophylline
E. Trimethoprim

Explanation: The symptoms described are those of lithium toxicity. Ibuprofen increases the concentration of lithium and therefore puts Mr NS at risk of toxicity. Manufacturer advises to monitor and adjust the dose.

Q84.
Question:
You receive a prescription for haloperidol depot injections for one of your patients. Your PMR system shows that the patient usually takes haloperidol tablets.
What is the most likely reason in this patient that the haloperidol has been changed from tablets to a depot injection?
 
A. Answer To improve adherence
B. To improve efficacy
C. To provide a more rapid response
D. To reduce the risk of extrapyramidal side effects
E. To reduce the risk of neuroleptic malignant syndrome

Explanation: Relapse and non-adherence is very common in psychotic/schizophrenic patients. To improve this, depots are recommended in order to save the patient managing any tablets/capsules, improving adherence and preventing relapse/admission into hospital.

Q85.
Question:
A 3-year-old child with no long term medical conditions requires paracetamol for the treatment of pyrexia associated with flu-like symptoms.
What is the most appropriate dose of paracetamol to be administered every six hours?
 
A. 60mg
B. 120mg
C. Answer 180mg
D. 240mg
E. 360mg

Explanation: Child 2-3 years: 180mg every 4-6 hours; maximum 4 doses per day.

Q86.
Question:
Miss SN has been brought into the hospital due to a car accident. She lost control of her body movements and fell asleep on the wheel. The nurses also mentioned that Miss SN’s eyes were rapidly moving involuntarily and she has gone into respiratory depression. Her drug history shows that she was taking Bisoprolol and Diazepam.
What does this indicate?
 
A. Miss SN has gone into anaphylactic reaction
B. Miss SN has taken too much warfarin
C. Answer Miss SN is experiencing an overdose with benzodiazepines
D. She is experiencing a severe interaction between two medications
E. Miss SN has taken too much bisoprolol

Explanation: Overdose: Ataxia, Nystagmus, Respiratory Depression, Coma, Drowsiness

Q87.
Question:
Miss S, a 36-year-old female has a severe headache that came on suddenly. She feels sick and her vision was blurred before the pain began.
Which of the following would be the most appropriate treatment for her GP to prescribe to treat the headache?
 
A. Answer Almotriptan 12.5mg tablets
B. Pizotifen 1.5mg tablets
C. Propranolol 80mg tablets
D. Timolol maleate 10mg tablets
E. Topiramate 50mg tablets

Explanation: Almotriptan is indicated for the treatment of acute migraine. The other options except Topiramate, which is used in epilepsy, are for prophylaxis of migraine.

Q88.
Question:
Mrs RE comes into the pharmacy and requests a bottle of ibuprofen for her child.
What dose do you recommend she give her 3 year old?
 
A. 50mg three times a day
B. 50mg three to four times a day
C. Answer 100mg three times a day
D. 150mg three times a day
E. 200mg three times a day

Explanation: Child 1-3 years: 100mg 3 times a day, maximum daily dose to be given in 2-4 divided dose; maximum 30mg/kg per day.


Q89.
Question:
Mrs D, who is 45 years old, has been suffering from chronic diarrhoea since starting metformin 6 months ago when she was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. The GP decided to change her medication to Canagliflozin 100mg once daily as monotherapy.
What is the mechanism of action of Canagliflozin?
 
A. Binds to, and activates the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor to increase insulin secretion
B. Answer Reversibly inhibits sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 in the renal proximal convoluted tubule to reduce glucose reabsorption and increase urinary glucose excretion
C. Inhibits dipeptidylpeptidase-4 to increase secretion and lower glucagon secretion
D. Decrease gluconeogenesis and increases peripheral utilisation of glucose
E. An inhibitor of intestinal alpha glucosidases and delays the absorption of starch and sucrose

Explanation: Dapagliflozin, Canagliflozin and empagliflozin reversibly inhibit sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 in the renal proximal convoluted tubule to reduce glucose reabsorption and increase urinary glucose excretion.

Q90.
Question:
A patient with type 2 diabetes needs to commence insulin treatment and would like to use an insulin preparation that is injected subcutaneously TWICE daily with meals.
Which of the following is the most suitable insulin preparation for this regimen?
 
A. Actrapid (soluble insulin)
B. Apidra (insulin glulisine)
C. Answer Humalog Mix25 (biphasic insulin lispro)
D. Lantus (insulin glargine)
E. NovoRapid (insulin aspart)

Explanation: Humalog Mix25 (biphasic insulin lispro) is a combination of an intermediate acting and rapid acting insulin. This is commonly used for twice daily regimens when basal-bolus regimens are unsuitable/not tolerated.

